README.md, before:

# NavDrill Quality (NavDQ)

NavDrill Quality (NavDQ) is an open-source software tool designed to support quality assurance and quality control (QA/QC) of underground production drilling and blasting operations. The software enables spatial integration of drill navigation data into mine coordinate systems, allowing systematic comparison between designed and as-drilled drill holes and preparation of quantitative QA/QC metrics.

NavDQ is intended for use by mining engineers, geospatial engineers, and technical personnel involved in drill-and-blast planning, QA/QC review, and drilling performance analysis.

---

## Key Features

- Transformation of drill navigation data from drill-local coordinate systems into the mine spatial reference system
- Spatial reconstruction of as-drilled drill hole geometries
- Preparation of quantitative QA/QC metrics for drilling accuracy and deviation analysis
- Preservation and structuring of drilling metadata, including rock mass–related information
- Generation of industry-standard outputs for downstream analysis and visualization
- Graphical user interface (GUI) for configuring inputs and executing workflows without direct code interaction

---

## Supported Input Data

NavDQ processes the following input datasets:

- Drill Design IREDES files
- Navigation Drill Return IREDES files generated by underground drill rigs
- Designed drill hole datasets exported from mine planning platforms (CSV format), thus csv/excel dataset containing drill hole design info such as RingID, HoleID, 
  Hole colar and Toe XYZ coordinates, 

### File Naming Requirements

For correct association of design and navigation data, the following naming conventions are required:

- Drill Design IREDES files and Navigation Drill Return IREDES files must correspond to the same production ring and share the same base file name.
- Navigation Drill Return IREDES files must include the prefix **`DQ`** at the beginning of the file name.

#### Example (single ring within a stope):

- Drill Design IREDES file:  (Stope Name_Ring Identifier)
  `DIT_4700_120ST1_R1` 
- Navigation Drill Return IREDES file:  (DQStope Name_Ring Identifier)
  `DQDIT_4700_120ST1_R1_XXXXXXX`

where `R1` denotes the ring number and additional characters may follow the ring identifier in the navigation Drill Return IREDES file name.

NavDQ processes drilling data on a per-stope basis, where each stope may consist of multiple production rings.

---

## Outputs

NavDQ generates multiple analysis-ready outputs, including:

- Spatially referenced as-drilled drill hole datasets
- IREDES-formatted files suitable for as-drilled and as-built import workflows
- DXF representations of as-drilled drill hole polylines
- Structured CSV-based quality reports containing quantitative QA/QC metrics and associated drilling metadata

All outputs are designed to integrate with existing mine planning, design, and visualization tools without requiring changes to established operational workflows.

---

## Software Design Overview

NavDQ is implemented as a modular processing pipeline that separates data ingestion, parsing, spatial transformation, metric preparation, and output generation into distinct stages. Spatial alignment between drill-local and mine coordinate systems is treated as a core component of the workflow, ensuring consistency and traceability between input data and derived outputs.

The software prioritizes compatibility with industry-standard formats (IREDES, DXF, CSV) to facilitate integration across different mine planning environments. A graphical user interface is provided to support practical use in operational engineering settings.

---

## Installation

Clone the repository:

```bash
git clone http://github.com/KennethKwabenaKenney/NavDrillQuality.git
cd NavDrillQuality
```
OR

Download the Windows Installer Package in the Output Folder

OR

Download the standalone executable in the dist folder

---

## Usage

NavDQ can be executed using the graphical user interface.

1. Launch the application
2. Select input Drill Design IREDES files, Navigation Drill Return IREDES files, and design hole CSV files
3. Configure processing parameters as required
4. Execute the processing workflow
5. Review generated outputs and QA/QC reports

---

## Documentation

* JOSS manuscript: `paper/paper.md`
* Technical system description: available upon request

---

## License

This project is released under the MIT License. See the `LICENSE` file for details.

---

## Contact

For questions, feedback, or contributions, please open an issue in the GitHub repository.
"# NavDrillQuality"

Commit message:

Update README with NAVDQ.py usage instructions
Added instructions for running NAVDQ.py in Python IDEs.

README.md, after:

# NavDrill Quality (NavDQ)

NavDrill Quality (NavDQ) is an open-source software tool designed to support quality assurance and quality control (QA/QC) of underground production drilling and blasting operations. The software enables spatial integration of drill navigation data into mine coordinate systems, allowing systematic comparison between designed and as-drilled drill holes and preparation of quantitative QA/QC metrics.

NavDQ is intended for use by mining engineers, geospatial engineers, and technical personnel involved in drill-and-blast planning, QA/QC review, and drilling performance analysis.

---

## Key Features

- Transformation of drill navigation data from drill-local coordinate systems into the mine spatial reference system
- Spatial reconstruction of as-drilled drill hole geometries
- Preparation of quantitative QA/QC metrics for drilling accuracy and deviation analysis
- Preservation and structuring of drilling metadata, including rock mass–related information
- Generation of industry-standard outputs for downstream analysis and visualization
- Graphical user interface (GUI) for configuring inputs and executing workflows without direct code interaction

---

## Supported Input Data

NavDQ processes the following input datasets:

- Drill Design IREDES files
- Navigation Drill Return IREDES files generated by underground drill rigs
- Designed drill hole datasets exported from mine planning platforms (CSV format), thus csv/excel dataset containing drill hole design info such as RingID, HoleID, 
  Hole colar and Toe XYZ coordinates, 

### File Naming Requirements

For correct association of design and navigation data, the following naming conventions are required:

- Drill Design IREDES files and Navigation Drill Return IREDES files must correspond to the same production ring and share the same base file name.
- Navigation Drill Return IREDES files must include the prefix **`DQ`** at the beginning of the file name.

#### Example (single ring within a stope):

- Drill Design IREDES file:  (Stope Name_Ring Identifier)
  `DIT_4700_120ST1_R1` 
- Navigation Drill Return IREDES file:  (DQStope Name_Ring Identifier)
  `DQDIT_4700_120ST1_R1_XXXXXXX`

where `R1` denotes the ring number and additional characters may follow the ring identifier in the navigation Drill Return IREDES file name.

NavDQ processes drilling data on a per-stope basis, where each stope may consist of multiple production rings.

---

## Outputs

NavDQ generates multiple analysis-ready outputs, including:

- Spatially referenced as-drilled drill hole datasets
- IREDES-formatted files suitable for as-drilled and as-built import workflows
- DXF representations of as-drilled drill hole polylines
- Structured CSV-based quality reports containing quantitative QA/QC metrics and associated drilling metadata

All outputs are designed to integrate with existing mine planning, design, and visualization tools without requiring changes to established operational workflows.

---

## Software Design Overview

NavDQ is implemented as a modular processing pipeline that separates data ingestion, parsing, spatial transformation, metric preparation, and output generation into distinct stages. Spatial alignment between drill-local and mine coordinate systems is treated as a core component of the workflow, ensuring consistency and traceability between input data and derived outputs.

The software prioritizes compatibility with industry-standard formats (IREDES, DXF, CSV) to facilitate integration across different mine planning environments. A graphical user interface is provided to support practical use in operational engineering settings.

---

## Installation

Clone the repository:

```bash
git clone http://github.com/KennethKwabenaKenney/NavDrillQuality.git
cd NavDrillQuality
```
OR

Download the Windows Installer Package in the Output Folder

OR

Download the standalone executable in the dist folder

OR

Download the NAVDQ.py in the main branch and run inside any python IDE (such as Spyder etc.)

---

## Usage

NavDQ can be executed using the graphical user interface.

1. Launch the application
2. Select input Drill Design IREDES files, Navigation Drill Return IREDES files, and design hole CSV files
3. Configure processing parameters as required
4. Execute the processing workflow
5. Review generated outputs and QA/QC reports

---

## Documentation

* JOSS manuscript: `paper/paper.md`
* Technical system description: available upon request

---

## License

This project is released under the MIT License. See the `LICENSE` file for details.

---

## Contact

For questions, feedback, or contributions, please open an issue in the GitHub repository.
"# NavDrillQuality"
